Users of mobile devices in 2018 faced what could be the strongest cybercriminal onslaught ever seen. Over the course of the year, we observed both new mobile device infection techniques (for example, DNS hijacking) and a step-up in the use of tried-and-tested distribution schemes (for example, SMS spam). 
In 2018, we uncovered three mobile APT campaigns aimed primarily at spying on victims, including reading messages in social networks. Alongside these campaigns, this report touches on all the major events in the world of mobile threats that occurred during the year.
Rise of the droppers.
In the past three years, dropper Trojans have become the weapon of choice for cybercriminals specializing in mobile malware. The methods for assembling these Matryoshka-like programs were streamlined, allowing them to be easily created, used and sold by various groups. A dropper creator may have several clients involved in developing ransomware Trojans, banking Trojans, and apps showing persistent ads. Droppers are used as a means to hide the original malicious code, which simultaneously 
    counteracts detection. The dropper works particularly well against detection based on file hashes, since it generates a new hash each time, while the malware inside does not change a single byte.
    Enables any number of unique files to be created. Virus writers need this, for instance, when using their platform with a fake app store.

Although mobile droppers are nothing new, in Q1 2018 we saw a sharp rise in the number of users attacked by packed malware. The biggest contribution was made by members of the Trojan-Dropper.AndroidOS.Piom family. Growth continued in Q2 and beyond, but much more smoothly. There is no doubt that established groups that have not yet embraced droppers will soon either create their own or buy ready-made ones. This trend will affect the statistical map of detected threats: we will see fewer unique mobile malware families, replaced by droppers of various kinds.
Banking Trojans ride the wave.
Last year’s stats on the number of attacks involving mobile banking Trojans were eye-catching. At the beginning of 2018, it seemed that this type of threat had stabilized both by number of unique samples discovered and by number of users attacked. However, already by Q2 the situation had radically changed for the worse. New records were set in terms of both number of mobile banking Trojans detected and number of attacked users. The root cause of this hike is not clear, but the main culprits are the creators of the Asacub and Hqwar Trojans. The former has quite a long history — according to our data, the group behind it has been at work for more than three years. Asacub itself evolved from an SMS Trojan that was armed from the get-go with tools to counteract deletion and intercept incoming calls and SMS messages. Later, the creators of the malware beefed up its logic and began mass distribution using the same attack vector as before: social engineering via SMS. Online forums where people often expect messages from unfamiliar users became a source of mobile numbers. Next, the avalanche propagation method kicked in, with infected devices themselves becoming distributors — Asacub sent itself to everyone in the victim’s phone book.

However, banking Trojans in 2018 were noteworthy not just in terms of scale, but mechanics as well. One aspect of this is the increasingly common use of Accessibility Services in banking threats. This is partly a response to new versions of Android that make it increasingly difficult to overlay phishing windows on top of banking apps, and partly the fact that using Accessibility allows the Trojan to lodge itself in the device so that users cannot remove it by themselves. What’s more, cybercriminals can use Accessibility Services to hijack a perfectly legitimate application and force it, say, to launch a banking app to make a money transfer right there on the victim’s device. Techniques have also appeared to counter dynamic analysis; for example, the Rotexy Trojan checks to see if it is running in a sandbox. However, this is not exactly a new thing, since we have observed such behavior before. That said, it should be noted that combined with obfuscation, anti-dynamic analysis techniques can be effective if virus writers manage to infiltrate their Trojan into a popular app store, in which case both static and dynamic processing may be powerless. Although sandbox detection cannot be said to be common practice among cybercriminals, the trend is evident, and we are inclined to believe that such techniques will become very sophisticated in the near future.