Adware and potentially dangerous software.

Throughout 2018, these two classes of mobile apps were in the Top 3 by number of installation packages detected. The reasons for this are many, but chief among them is the fact that adware and attacks on advertisers are a relatively safe method of enrichment for cybercriminals. Attacks of this kind do not cause damage to mobile device owners, save for some rare cases of devices overheating and burning up from the activity of an adware app deployed on them with root access. The harm is done to advertisers, since they pay for their banners being clicked by robots — infected mobile devices. Sure, there are adware apps that make it near impossible to use an infected device. For example, the victim might have to click on a dozen banners before being able to send an SMS. The problem is compounded by the fact that at the initial stages the user does not know which app installation (a flashlight or favorite game, say) led to such dire consequences, since ads are shown at random times and outside the interface of the adware-carrying app. And it only takes one such app to be installed and started for another dozen similar ones to appear, turning the device into an adware zombie. In the worst case scenario, this new wave will have a module with an exploit allowing it to write itself to the system directory or the factory settings rollback script. After that, the only way to restore the operational capacity of the device is to search for the original factory version of the firmware and download it via USB.

On a separate note, one click per banner costs less than a peanut, which is the key reason for the endless stream of unique adware apps — the more of them cybercriminals create and distribute, the more money they get. Lastly, adware modules are often coded without taking into account the confidentiality of the data transmitted, which means that requests to the advertiser’s infrastructure can be sent in unencrypted HTTP traffic and contain any amount of information about the victim, up to and including geolocation.

A slightly different situation is seen with RiskTool software, which had the largest share of all mobile threats detected in 2018. In-app purchases have long been a feature worldwide, whereby the device is tied to an account linked to a bank card. All processes are transparent to the user, and purchases can be canceled. RiskTool-type apps also feature an option for users to buy access to new levels in a game or a picture of a pretty girl, for example, but payment is totally non-transparent to the user. The app itself sends an SMS to a special number without any user involvement, and receives a confirmation message, which RiskTool reacts to; hence, the app knows about the successful payment and shows the purchased content. But the release of the promised content remains at the discretion of the app creators.

As a result, there is a huge number of RiskTool programs used to sell any content, but not requiring any significant development effort — in terms of technical implementation, sending a single SMS is doable for any novice programmer.

There is currently no reason to believe that the flood of adware and RiskTool-class apps will abate, and in 2019 we will likely see a similar picture.